TIME PASSES
by
Virginia Woolf
(52 Tavistock Square,
London,
WC.1.)
TIME PASSES
I
   It grew darker. Clouds covered the moon; in the early
hours of the morning a thin rain drummed on the roof, and
starlight and moonlight and all light on sky and earth was
quenched. Nothing could survive the flood, the profusion,
the downpouring of the immense darkness which, creeping in at
keyholes and crevices, stole round the window blinds, came in
to the bedrooms, and swallowed up, here a jug and basin, there
a bowl of red and yellow dahlias, there the sharp edges and
firm bulk of a chest of drawers. Not only was furniture
confounded; but there was scarcely anything left of body or
mind by which one could say 'this is he' or 'this is she'; but
from the many bodies lying asleep either in the rigid attitudes
of the old passively creased in the creases of the beds, or
easily lying scarcely covered, in childhood, as if a cloud
lightly curved under them, there rose, to break silvery on the
surface, thoughts, dreams, impulses, of which the sleepers by
day knew nothing. Now a hand was raised as if to clutch
something or perhaps ward off something; now the anguish which
is forbidden to cry out for comfort parted the lips of the
sleepers; now and then somebody laughed out loud, as if sharing
a joke with nothingness.
   It seemed almost as if there must be ghostly confidantes
about, sharers, comforters, who, stooping by the bedside,
(2)
gravely treasured up and engulphed in the folds of their
cloaks, in their compassionate hearts, what was murmured and
cried, accepted and understood those changes from torture to
calm, from hate to indifference, which came and went and came
again upon the sleepers' faces. It seemed, at least, as if
each reached out and found standing at the foot of his bed the
counterpart of his thoughts, the sharer of his deeds, found in
sleep a completeness denied him by day, and to that cried and to
that confided and laughed the senseless wild laughter which, had
the waking heard it, would have startled them. To each a
sharer, to each thought an answer, and in this knowledge content -
it might be so. It might be that dreaming and sleeping each
put off the cumber and trouble of flesh and left the house and
paced the beach and asked of the wave and the sky: is the sharp-
edged furniture all, and the flower; is the day all; is our
duty to the day?
   The waves breaking seemed like night shaking her head back
and letting despairingly her dark down, and musing and mourning
as if she lamented the doom which drowned the earth and extin-
guished its lights and of all ships and towns left nothing.
The wave sweeps up the beach; the night mourns human sorrow;
the sea's beauty consoles; so the wind may have answered the
sleepers, the dreamers, pacing the sand and asking, Why wrap us
about in the [strike]d[/strike]sea's beauty, why console us with the lamentation
of the breaking waves, if in truth we only spin this clothing
(3)
from terror, weave this garment for nothingness?
II
   Meanwhile, nothing stirred in the drawing room, or in the
dining room, or on the staircase. Only, through the rusty
hinges and swollen sea-moistened wood-work certain airs,

detached from the body of the wind, crept round corners and
ventured indoors. Almost one might imagine them questioning,
wondering, as they gently attempted the flap of hanging wall
paper -- would it, they seemed to ask, hang much longer; when
would it fall? Then, smoothly brushing the walls, they passed
on, musingly, as if asking the red and yellow flowers on the
wall paper whether they would fade, and questioning, (gently -
there was time at their disposal) the torn letters in the waste
paper basket, the flowers, the books, all of which were now
open to them, in communion with them, and softly illumined, now
and then, by a beam from the light house. So wandering through
the rooms and reaching the kitchen they paused to ask of the
table and the silver-tailed saucepans ranged orderly on the
shelf, the same question; how long would [u]they[/u] endure, of what
nature were they? Were they made of wind and rain, allies, with
whom in the darkness, wind and rain might commune? Were they
obdurate? Time would show.
   So, the light directing them with its pale footfall, on
step, on mat, on wall, the little airs passed, paused, mounted
the staircase, nosed at the bedroom doors. Here, one might
(4)
think, surely they must cease. Whatever else may perish and
disappear, what lies here is steadfast. Here, one might say
to those sliding lights on the ceiling, those grey airs of mid-
night that bend over the bed itself, here you can nei[strike]g[/strike]ther touch
nor destroy. Upon which, wearily, ghostlily, as if they had
feather-light fingers and the light persistency of feathers,
they would look, once, on the shut eyes, and the loosely
clasping fingers, and fold their garments, wearily, and disappear.
   They took themselves off now (but after all it would soon be
winter) to the window on the staircase, which they rubbed and
fumbled; shook a wandering light upstairs in the servants'
bedrooms among boxes in the attics; descended to ripple the
cloaks outside the dining room; to meditate among the apples on
the table, to blanch and nibble their redness and hardness, -
how could one tarnish them? - [strike]N[/strike]next reached the roses in the jar
and tried there too, with their vapid fumbling, how petal could
be nipped from petal, the stalk swollen, [strike]and[/strike] the pallor stained,
tried the picture on the easel and brushed the mat and blew a
little sand along the floor.
   At last, desisting, like spies called back to the army
they gathered in the middle of the hall. All ceased together;
all sighed together; all together gave off an aimless gust of
lamentation to which some door in the kitchen replied; swung
wide; [strike]it[/strike] admitted nothing; banged to. There was silence.
   Then as if to refresh the failing powers of destruction,
(5)
they spread their garments, they rose up and the wind rose and
the waves rose and through the house there lifted itself one
sullen wave of doom which curled and crashed and the whole
earth seemed ruining and washing away in water.
III
   But what after all, is one night? A short space,
especially when the darkness dims so soon, and so soon a bird
sings, a cock crows, [strike]a[/strike]or a faint green quickens, like a turning
leaf, in the hollow of the wave. Night, however, succeeds to
night. The winter holds a pack of them in store and deals them
equally, evenly, with indefatigable fingers. They lengthen;
they darken. Some of them hold aloft clear plan[strike]t[/strike]ets, plates of
brightness. The autumn tress, ravaged as they are, take on the
flash of tattered flags kindling in the gloom of cool cathedral
caves where gold letters and marble pages describe death in
battle and how bones far away bleach and burn in Indian sands.
The autumn trees gleam in the yellow moonlight, in the light of
harvest moons, the light which mellows the energy of labour, and
smooths the stubble, and brings the wave lapping blue to the beach.
   It seemed now as if, touched by human penitence and all its
toil, divine goodness had drawn the curtain and displayed behind
it, single, distinct, the hare erect, the wave falling, the
boat rocking, which, did we deserve them should be ours always.
But alas - divine goodness, twitching the cord, draws the curtain;
it does not please him; he covers his treasures in a drench of
(6)
hail, and so breaks them, so confuses them, that it seems
impossible that their calm should ever return, or from their
fragments we should ever compose again the whole, the truth.
For our penitence deserves a glimpse only, our toil respite
only.
   The nights now are full of wind and destruction; the trees
plunge and bend and their dishonoured leaves fly helter skelter
until the lawn is plastered with them and they lie packed in
gutters and choke rain pipes and scatter damp paths. Also the
sea tosses and breaks itself, and should any escaped soul, any
sleeper, who fancies that in sleep he has grasped the hand of a
sharer walk the edge of the sea, no image with divine promptitude
and semblance of serving comes readily to hand bringing the night
to order and making the sea reflect the compass of the soul.
He may pace by the hour on the midnight beach but the hand
dwindles in his hand; the voice bellows in his ear. Almost,
one would have thought, it is vain, in such confusion, to ask
the night those questions: what, why? which roused the sleeper
from his dreams, and sent him running [strike]down[/strike] to the waves, to seek,
it seemed, a comforter.
   Now again, since autumn was far advanced, it was possible
to attempt the house. All the beds were empty; the stray airs,
spies, advance guard of great armies, brushed bare mattresses and,
as they nibbled and moistened and fanned this way and that, met
nothing that wholly resisted them, but only hangings that
(7)
flapped, wood that creaked, the bare legs of tables, saucepans
and china already furred, tarnished, cracked. What people had
shed and left - a pair of shoes, a shooting cap, some faded
skirts and coats in wardrobes - those alone kept the human shape
and in the emptiness indicated how once they were filled and
animated; how once hands were busy with hooks and buttons; how
once the looking glass had held a face, leaning, looking; had
held a world hollowed out in which a figure turned, a hand flashed,
the door opened, in came children; rushing and tumbling; went
out again. Now, day after day, light turned, like a flower
reflected in water, its sharp image on the wall opposite. Only
the shadows of the trees, flourishing in the wind, made obeisance
on the wall, and for a moment darkened the pool in which light
reflected itself; or birds, flying, made a soft spot flutter
across the bedroom floor.
   So loveliness reigned and stillness reigned, and together made
the shape of loveliness itself, a form from which life had parted;
solitary like a pool at evening, far distant, seen from a train
window, vanishing so quic[strike]l[/strike]kly that the pool, pale in the evening,
is scarcely robbed of its solitude, though once seen. Stillness
&
loveliness
clasped hands in the bedroom; among the shrouded jugs and sheeted
chairs, even the prying of the wind, the soft nose of the clammy
sea airs, rubbing, snuffling, iterating and reiterating their
questions - "Will you fade? Will you perish?" scarcely disturbed
*
this peace, this indifference, this air of integrity, as if the
where there is no compromise, truth were there undraped,
(8)
question they asked needed no answering: we remain.
   Nothing it seemed could break that image, corrupt that
innocence, or disturb the swaying mantle of silence which,
week after week, in t[strike][?][/strike]he empty room, wove into itself the
falling cries of birds, ships hooting, the drone and hum of
the fields, a dog's bark, a man's shout, and folded them
round the house in silence. Once only a board sprang on the
landing; once in the middle of the night with a roar, with a
rupture, as, after centuries of quiescence, a rock rends itself
from the mountain and hurtles crashing in the valley, one fold
of the shawl loosened and swung to and fro. Then again peace
descended; and the shadow wavered; light bent to its own
image in adoration on the bedroom wall.
& lingering,
mixed with moonlight & with water & with [strike]quiet[/strike] silence.
   Suddenly, tearing the veil of silence with hands that had
stood in the washtub, grinding it with boots that had crunched
the shingle, old Mrs. McNab came as directed to open all
windows and dust the bedrooms.
IV
   As she lurched (for she rolled like a ship at sea) and
leered (for her eyes fell on nothing directly, but with a
sidelong glance that deprecated the scorn and anger of the
world - she was witless, she knew it), as she clutched the
bannisters and hauled herself upstairs and ro[strike]o[/strike]lled from room to
(9)
room, she sang. Rubbing the glass of the long looking glass
and leering sideways at her swinging figure a sound issued
from her lips - something that had been gay twenty years before
on the stage perhaps, had been hummed and danced to, but now
coming from the toothless, bonneted, care-taking woman was
rubbed of meaning, was like the voice of witlessness, humour,
persistency itself trodden down but springing up again, so that
as she lurched, dusting, wiping, she seemed to say how it was one
long sorrow and trouble, how it was getting up and going to bed
again, and bringing things out and putting them away again. It
was not easy or snug this world she had known for close on
eighty years. Bowed down she was with weariness. How long,
she asked, creaking and groaning on her knees under the bed
dusting the boards, how long shall it endure? but hobbled to
her feet again, pulled herself up and again, with her sidelong

leer which slipped and turned aside even from her own face, and
her own sorrows, stood and gaped in the glass, actually smiling,
and began again the old amble and hobble (taking up mats,
putting down china) granting, as she stood the chair straight by
the dressing table, her forgiveness of it all.
leaning her bony breasts on the hard thorn.
   Was it then that she had her consolations, when, with the
breeze in the west and the clouds white in the sun she stood at
her cottage door? For what reason did there twine about her
dirge this incorrigible hope? and why, with no gift to bestow
and no gift to take did she yet prefer to live[strike],[/strike]; singing, [strike]and[/strike]
(10)
dusting? Were there then for Mrs. MacNab who had been trampled
into the mud for generations, had been a mat for King and Kaiser,
moments of illumination, visions of joy, at the wash tub, say,
with her children? (Yet two had been base born and one had
deserted her) [strike]A[/strike]at the public house, drinking? Turning over
scraps in her drawers? Some cleavage of the dark there must have
been, some channel in the depths of obscurity through which light
enough issued to twist her face, smiling in the glass, and make
her, turning to her job again, mumble out the old Music hall song.
   Walking the beach the mystic, the visionary, were possessed
of intervals of comprehension perhaps; suddenly, unexpectedly,
looking at a stone, stirring a puddle with a stick, heard an
absolute answer, so that they were warm in the frost and had
comfort in the desert. The truth had been made known to them.
But Mrs. McNab was none of these. She was no skeleton lover,
who voluntarily surrenders and makes abstract and reduces the
multiplicity of the world to unity and its volume and anguish to
one voice piping clear and sweet an unmistakable message. The
inspired, the lofty minded, might walk the beach, hear in the lull
of the storm a voice, behold in some serene clearing a vision, and
so mount the pulpit and make public how it is simple, it is certain,
our duty, our hope; we are one. Mrs. McNab continued to drink
and gossip as before. She was toothless almost; she had pains
in all her limbs. She never divulged her reasons for opening
windows and dusting bedrooms, and singing, when her voice was gone,
(11)
her old silly song. Her message to a world now beginning to
break into the voluntary and irrepressible loveliness of spring
was transmitted by the lurch of her body and the leer of her
smile and in them no less than in the bleat of lamb and the bud
of cowslip were the broken syllables of a revelation more
confused but more profound (could one have read it) than any
accorded to solitary watchers, pacing the beach at midnight, and
receiving as they stirred the pool, revelations of an extra-
ordinary kind.
V
   For to them, as the evenings lengthened came the strangest
imaginations, the most authentic beckonings, in the sunset, on
the moonlit evenings when it seemed as if they were haled from
their flesh and that flesh were turned to atoms which drove
before the wind, and they must needs fly with arms stretched and
hair blowing to the wild shining west or the flashing stars, or
the tumbling waves. For it was as if the waves broke in them;
the stars flashed in their hearts; and the trees' strength, the
cliffs' nobility, the clouds' majesty were so brought together
purposely to assemble the scattered parts of the vision within.
   For a week perhaps towards the end of May this unity per-
sisted,   The spring without a leaf to toss, bare and bright,
like a virgin fierce in her chastity, scornful in her purity,
was laid out on fields wide eyed and watchful, entirely careless
of what was done or thought by the beholders. Nevertheless in
(12)
those mirrors, the minds of men, in those pools of uneasy water,
in which clouds for ever turn and shadows form, dreams persisted,
and it was impossible to resist the strange intimation which every
gull, flower, tree and the white earth itself seemed to declare
(but if questioned at once to withdraw) that good triumphs, happi-
ness prevails, order rules, or to resist the extraordinary stimulus
to range hither and thither in search of some absolute good, some
crystal of intensity, remote from the known pleasures and familiar
virtues, something alien to the processes of domestic life, single,
hard, bright, like a diamond in the sand, which would render the
possessor secure. Moreover, softened and acquiescent, the spring
with her bees humming and gnats dancing threw her [strike]l[/strike]cloak about her,
and veiled her eyes and averted her head, and among passing
shadows and flights of small rain seemed to have taken upon her a
knowledge of the sorrows of mankind.
   In this warmth, the wind sent its spies about the house again.
Flies wove a web in the sunny rooms; weeds that had grown close
to the glass in the night tapped methodically at the window pane.
When darkness fell, the stroke of the lighthouse which had laid
itself when nights were dark with authority upon the carpet,
tracing its pattern, came now mixed with moonlight gliding gently
and stealthily as if it laid its caress and lingered and looked
and came lovingly again. But in the very lull of this loving
caress, as the long stroke leant upon the bed, the rock was rent
asunder; another fold of the shawl loosened; there it hung, and
(13)
swayed. Through the short summer nights and the long summer
days when the empty rooms seemed to murmur with the echoes of
the fields and the hum of flies the long streamer waved gently,
swayed aimlessly; while the sun so striped and barred the rooms
and filled them with yellow haze that Mrs. McNab when she broke
in and lurched about looked like a tropical fish oaring its way
through sun-lanced waters.
   But slumber and sleep though it might there came later in
the summer ominous sounds like the measured blows of hammers
dulled on felt, which, with their repeated shocks still further
loosened the shawl and cracked the tea cups. Now and again some
glass tinkled in the cupboard as if a giant voice had shrieked
so loud in its agony that tumblers stood inside a cupboard
vibrated too. Then again silence fell; and then, night after
night, and sometimes in plain midday when the roses were bright
and light turned on the wall its shape clearly there seemed to
drop into this silence and indifference and clarity the thud of
something falling.
   At that season those who had gone down to pace the beach and
ask of the sea and sky what message they reported or what vision
they affirmed had to consider among the usual tokens of divine
bounty - for instance the sunset on the sea, the pallor of dawn,
the moon rising, fishing boats against the moon, something
isolated, out of harmony with this serenity; the silent
apparition of an ashen coloured ship for instance; a froth and
stain upon the bland surface of the sea as if something had
season
(14)
foamed and boiled and bled beneath. This intrusion into a
scene calculated to stir the most sublime reflections and lead
to the most comfortable conclusions stayed their pacing. It
was difficult blandly to overlook them; to abolish their signi-
ficance in the landscape; to continue, as one walked by the sea,
to marvel how beauty outside mirrored beauty within.
   Did nature supplement what man advanced? did she complete
what he began? With equal benignancy she saw his misery, con-
doned his meanness, acquiesced in his torture. That dream - of
sharing, of finding outside the house completion - was then but
a reflection in a mirror, and the mirror itself but the surface
glassiness which forms in quiescence when the nobler powers sleep
beneath[strike]?[/strike]. Impatient, despairing, yet loth to go (for beauty offers
her lures, has her consolations) to pace the beach was impossible:
contemplation was unendurable; the mirror was broken.
VI
   Night after night, summer and winter, the torment of storms,
the arrowlike stillness of fine weather, held their court without
interference. Listening (had there been anyone to listen) from
the upper rooms of the empty house only gigantic chaos streaked
with lightning could have been heard tumbling and tossing, as the
winds and waves disported themselves like the amorphous bulks of
leviathans whose brows are pierced by no light of reason, and
mounted one on top of another, and lunged and plunged in the dark-
ness or the daylight (for night and day, month and year ran shape-
(15)
lessly toge[strike]ht[/strike]ther) in idiot games until it seemed as if the
universe were battling and tumbling, in b[strike]u[/strike]rute confusion and
wanton lust aimlessly by itself.
   In spring the garden urns casually filled with wind blown
plants were gay as ever. Violets came and daffodils. But
the stillness and the brightness of the day were as strange as
the chaos and tumult of night, with the trees standing there,
and the flowers standing there, looking before them, looking
up, yet beholding nothing, eyeless, and so terrible.
VII
   Thinking no harm, for the family would not come, never
again, some said, and the house would be sold at Michaelmas
perhaps, Mrs. McNab stooped and picked a bunch of flowers to
take home with her. She laid them on the table while she
dusted. She was fond of flowers. It was a pity to let them
waste. Suppose the house was sold (she stood arms akimbo in
front of the looking glass) it would want seeing to - it would.
There it had stood all these years without a soul[strike]d[/strike] in it. The
books and things were mouldy, for what with the war and help
being hard to get, the house had not been cleaned as she could
have wished. It was beyond one person's strength to get it
straight now. She was too old. Her legs pained her. All
those books needed to be laid out on the grass in the sun;
there was plaster fallen in the hall; the rain pipe had blocked
over the study window and let the water in; the carpet was
(16)
ruined quite. But people should come themselves; they should
have sent somebody down to see. For there were clothes in the
cupboards; they had left clothes in all the bedrooms. What
was she to do with them? They had the moth in them - Mrs.
Ramsay's things. Poor lady! She would never want [u]them[/u] again.
She was dead they said; years ago, in London. There was the
old grey cloak she wore gardening (Mrs. McNab fingered it).
She could see her,as she came up the drive with the washing,
stooping over her flowers (the garden was a pitiful sight now,
all run to riot, and rabbits scuttling at you out of the beds) -
she could see her with one of the children by her, in that grey
cloak. There were boots and shoes there, and a brush and comb
left on the dressing table for all the world as if she expected
to com[strike]b[/strike]e back to-morrow. (She had died very sudden at the end,
they said.) And once they had been coming, but had put off
coming, what with the war, and travel being so difficult these
days; they had never come all these years; just sent her money;
but never wrote, never came and expected to find things as they
had left them, ah dear! Why the [strike]fe[/strike]dressing table drawers were
full of things (she pulled them open) handkerchiefs, bits of
ribbon. Yes, she could see Mrs. Ramsay as she came up the
drive with the washing.
   "Good evening, Mrs. McNab," she would say.
   She had a pleasant way with her. The girls all liked her.
But dear, many things had changed since then (she shut the drawer);
many families had lost their dearest. So she was dead; and Mr.
(17)
A[strike]b[/strike]ndrew the tall young gentleman killed; and Miss Prue with the
fair hair, masses of it twisted round her head, dead too they
said, with her first baby; but everyone had lost someone these
years. Prices had gone up shamefully, and didn't come down
again neither. She could well remember her in her grey cloak.
   "Good evening, Mrs. McNab," she would [strike]d[/strike] say, and told cook
to keep a plate of milk soup for her, quite thought she wanted
it, carrying that heavy basket all the way up from town. She
could see her now, stooping over her flowers, with a little boy
there, (faint and flickering, like a yellow beam or the circle
at the end of a telescope, a lady in a grey cloak, stooping, over
her flowers went flickering, wandering, [strike]as Maggie stooped and[/strike]
[strike]rose,[/strike] over the bedroom wall, across the washstand, as Mrs.
McNab hobbled and ambled, dusting, straightening.)
   And cook's name now? Mildred? Marian? - some name like
that. Ah, she had forgotten - she did forget things. Fiery,
like all red haired women. Many a laugh they had had. She
was always welcome in the kitchen. She made them laugh, she did.
Things were better then than now.
   She sighed; there was too much work for one woman. She
wagged her head this side and that. Why, it was all damp in here;
the plaster was falling. What ever did they want to hang a
beast's skull there? gone mouldy too. And rats in all the
attics. The rain came in. But they never sent; never came.
Some of the locks had gone, so the doors banged. She didn't
like to be up here at dusk alone neither. It was too much for
(18)
one woman, too much, too much. She creaked, she moaned. She
banged the door. She turned the key in the lock, and left the
house alone, shut up, locked.
VIII
   The house was left; the house was deserted. It was left
like a shell on a sandhill to fill with dry salt grains now that
life had left it. The long night seemed to have set in; the
trifling airs, nibbling, the clammy breaths fumbling seemed to
have triumphed. The saucepan had rusted and the mat decayed.
Toads had nosed their way in. Idly, aimlessly, the swaying
shawl s[strike]e[/strike]ung to and fro. A thistle thrust itself between the
w
tiles in the larder. The swallows nested in the drawing room;
the floor was strewn with straw; the plaster fell in shovel
fulls; rafters were laid bare; rats carried off this and that
to gnaw behind the wainscots. Tortoise shell butterflies burst
X |
from the chrysalis,
&
pattered their life out on the window pane.
[strike]and died on the window panes.[/strike] Poppies sowed themselves among
the dahlias; the lawn waved with long grass; giant artichokes
towered among roses; a fringed carnation flowered among the
cabbages; while the gentle tapping of a weed at the window had
become, on winters' nights, a drumming from sturdy trees and
thorned briars which made the whole room green in summer.
   What power could now prevent the fertility, the insensibility
of nature? Like a spot of sunlight Mrs. McNab's dream of a lady,
of a child, of a plate of milk soup[strike],[/strike]?
it
had wavered over the walls
(19)
and vanished. She had locked the door; she had gone. It was
beyond the work of one woman, she said. They never sent. They
never wrote. There were things up there rotting in the drawers -
it was a shame to leave things so, she said. The place was gone
to rack and ruin.
   Only the lighthouse beam entered the rooms for a moment, sent
its sudden glare into the drawing room or bedroom, over bed and
wall, looked [strike]with contentment[/strike] at the thistle and the swallow, the
rat and the straw,
severely
when the night was dark, caressed them lovingly
in the soft nights of spring.
   As for the spirits, who in sleep had left their bodies, and
dreamed of some communion, had dreamed that grasping the hand of
a sharer, they might complete, down on the beach alone, in the
presence of sea and sky, that pattern that vision, that beginning
which sought fulfilment, either they had been woken by that
prodigious cannonading which made the wine glasses tinkle in the
cupboards, or the snout protruding, the stain bleeding, had so
gravely damaged the picture that they had fled. They had dashed
the mirror to the ground. They saw nothing now. They stumbled

and strove, blindly pulling one foot out of the mud, blindly
stamping the other in. Let the wind blow; let the poppy seed
itself, and the carnation mate with the cabbage. Let the
swallow build in the drawing room, and the thistle thrust aside
the tiles, and the butterfly sun itself on the faded chintz of the
arm chair[strike]s[/strike]. Let the broken glass and china lie out on the lawn
and be tangled over with grass and wild berries.
(20)
   For now had c ome that moment, that hesitation when dawn
trembles and night pauses, when if a feather alight in the scale
it will be weighed down. One feather, and the house, sinking,
falling, would have turned and pitched downwards to the depths of
darkness. In the ruined room, picknickers would have lit their
kettles; lovers sought shelter there, lying on the bare boards;
and the shepherd stored his dinner on the fallen bricks, and the
tramp slept with his c oat round him to ward off the cold. Then
the roof would have fallen; briars and hemlocks burgeoning,
curving, would have blotted out path, step [strike]and[/strike] window, would have
grown, unequally but lustily over the mound, until some trespasser,
losing his way, could have told only by a red hot poker among
nettles, or a scrap of [strike]blue[/strike] china in the hemlock, that here once
someone had lived; there had been a house.
   If the feather had fallen, if it had tipped the scale down-
wards, the whole house would have plunged to the depths to lie
upon the sands of oblivion. But there was a force working;
something not highly conscious; something that leered, something
that lurched; something not inspired to go about its work with
dignified ritual or solemn chanting. Mrs. McNab groaned; Mrs.
Bast, her crony, creaked. They were old; they were stiff; their
legs ached. They came with their brooms and pails at last; they
got to work. All of a sudden, would Mrs. McNab see that the
house was ready, one of the young ladies wrote; would she get
this done: would she get that done; all in a hurry. They might
(21)
be coming for the summer; had left everything to the last; ex-
pected to find things as they had left them. Slowly and pain-
fully, with broom and pail, mopping, scouring, Mrs. McNab, Mrs.
Bast stayed the corruption and the rot; rescued from the pool of
time that was fast closing over them now a basin, now a cupboard;
fetched up from oblivion all the Waverley novels and a tea set
one morning; in the afternoon restored to sun and air a brass
fender and a set of steel fire irons. George, Mrs. Bast's son,
hammered nails
[strike]caught rats,[/strike] cut grass. They had the [strike]v[/strike]builders. Attended with
the creaking of hinges and the screeching of bolts, the slamming
and banging of damp-swollen wood-work some rusty laborious birth
seemed to be tak[strike]e[/strike]ing place, as the women, stooping, rising, groaning,
singing, slapped and slammed, up stairs now, now down in the
cellars. Oh, they said, the work!
   They drank their tea in the bedroom sometimes, or in the study;
X
breaking off work at midnight with the [strike]smudge[/strike] on their faces, and
their old hands clasped and cramped with the broom handles.
Flopped on chairs they contemplated now the magnificent conquest
over taps and bath; now the more arduous, more partial triumph
over long rows of philosophy, black as ravens once, now white-stained
breeding pale mushrooms and secreting furtive spiders. Once more,
as she felt the tea warm in her, the telescope fitted itself to
Mrs. McNab's eyes, and in a ring of light she saw the old gentle-
man, lean as a rake, wagging his head, as she came up with the
washing, talking to himself, she supposed, on the lawn. Never
noticed her. Some said he was dead; some said she was dead.
(22)
Which was it? Mrs. Bast didn't know for certain either. The
young gentleman was dead. That she was sure. She had read
his name in the papers.
   There was the cook now, Mildred, Marian, some such name as
that - a red headed woman, quick tempered like all her sort, but
kind, too, if you knew the way with her. Many a laugh they had
had together. She saved a plate of soup for Maggie; a bite of
ham, sometimes; whatever was over. They lived well in those
days. They had everything they wanted (glibly,, jovially, with the
tea hot in her, she unwound her ball of memories, sitting in the
wicker arm chair). There was always plenty doing, people in the
house, twenty staying sometimes, and washing up till long past
midnight.
   Mrs. Bast (she had never known them; had lived in Glasgow
at that time) wondered, putting her cup down, whatever they hung
that beast's skull there for? Shot in foreign parts no doubt.
   It might well be, said Mrs. McNab, wantoning on with her
memories; they had friends in eastern countries; gentlemen
staying there; [strike]and[/strike] cook
had to
ma[strike]d[/strike]ke
curries
[strike]dishes[/strike] for them; she had seen them
once through the dining room door (she crept up behind the French
girl who waited at table). S[strike]e[/strike]he could see them now sitti[strike]n[/strike]ng at
dinner, twenty she dared say all in their jewellery, and she
stayed to help wash up [strike]might be[/strike] till after midnight.
   Ah, said Mrs. Bast, they'd find it changed. She leant out
of the window. She watched her son George
cutting
[strike]scything[/strike] the grass.
They might well ask, what had been done to it? seeing how old
(23)
Kennedy was supposed to have the charge of it, and then his
leg got so bad after he fell from the cart; and perhaps then
no one for a year; or the better part of one, and then Tommie
Curwen, and seeds might be sent, but who should say if they were
ever planted?
   [[strike]She hailed her son[/strike]. [strike]He looked at her[/strike]. [strike]He said nothing[/strike].]
[strike]He was one of those quiet ones[/strike].
George
[strike]He[/strike] was a great one for work.
[strike]He turned to his scything again[/strike].
He was one of those quiet ones.
On he went, like a machine,
scything scything, wet or fine, a great one for work. Well,
they must be getting along with the cupb[strike]a[/strike]o[strike]o[/strike]ards, she supposed.
   At last, after days of labour within, of cutting, raking
sweeping digging without, dusters were flicked out of the
windows; the windows were shut fast; keys were turned all over
the house; the front door was banged; it was finished.
   And now, as if the cleaning and the scrubbing and the
scything and the mowing had drowned them, there rose that half
heard melody, that intermittent music which the ear half catches
but lets fall, a bark, a bleat, irregular, intermittent, yet
somehow related - the jar of an insect, the tremor of cut grass,
dissevered yet somehow belonging, the hum of a dor beetle, the
squ[strike]aek[/strike]ak of a wheel, loud, low, but mysteriously related, which
the ear strains to bring together and is always on the verge of
harmonising; but they are never quite heard, never fully
harmonised, and at last, in the evening, one after another the
one
dies & another dies, &
sounds [strike]died out[/strike], and the harmony falter[strike]ed[/strike]s and [strike]fell into complete[/strike]
complete
[strike]silence[/strike]. With the sunset sharpness was lost, and like mist
& the silence is
is complete
(24)
rising, quiet rose, the rooks settled the grass settled. Loosely
the world shook itself down to sleep, darkly here without a light
to it, save what came suffused through leaves or pale on flowers.
IX
   Then indeed peace had come. Messages of peace breathed from
the sea to the shore. Never to break its sleep any more, to lull
it rather more deeply to rest and whatever the dreamers dreamt
wisely, dreamt holily, to confirm -- what else was it murmuring?
And behold, our message, our wisdom, it seemed to say, is clothed
in splendour. The wave sweeps dark up the beach. Our peace is
a brooding peace, our beauty a conscious beauty. We lie at your
door wishing you well.
   Who, waking in the depths of this dark, this holy, this
restful night whose darkness was a veil, whose murmur was of
secrets too deep to be fully uttered, could, even now, after the
damp and the spies, after the toad and the rat, resist the desire
to walk there on the beach on the pale sand, with the waves break-
ing, and only a light in the harbour a light on some mast head, a
light on the waves, and ask again, What and why?
   Yet seeing how often they had asked, how much had suffered,
how often been mocked, it were wiser perhaps to lie there in the
dark; to listen only; to let it say what it would -- to chant,
the croo[strike]m[/strike],
n
that it was a marvellous night, and the moon burnt
through the blue like a rose. Through the open window the voice
of the beauty of the world came murmuring, too softly for them to
(25)
hear exactly what it said -- but what matter if they caught the
meaning? - how again and again the wave sweeps in splendour up
the beach. The voice entreated the sleepers, if they would not
actually come to the beach itself, at least to lift the blind and
look out. They would see how the robes of the august God flowed
down; [strike]hew[/strike] his head was crowned; his sceptre jewelled; and in his
eyes a child might look. And if the sleepers still faltered, and
said, No: that it was vapour this splendour of his, and the dew
had more power than he, without complaint without argument, the
voice would sing its song. Gently the waves would break; tenderly
the light would beam. And everything in the room -- cupboards, basins,
tables, -- freshly ordered, straitly ranged - seemed to lie under the
enchantment, placed more statelily to-night, conscious more gravely
to-night of an order, of a purpose, which when day broke would be
revealed.
   Indeed, the voice might resume, as the leaves of the passion
flower tapped the window, and the mazy pattern of leaf, chair,
table all waved on the floor, he was content with this; it was
enough this -- to fold the sleepers round in blue, to be, should
they need him, waiting them there.
   After all then why not agree? accept? Without losing their
scepticism or sinking into the depths of acquiescence, they might,
half turned, look out: assume some look that was not any longer
rapture; lie watchfully awake and see how through a chink of the
blind the splendid monarch flowed down; hear the [strike]b[/strike] vast sigh of

26
all the waves breaking in measure round the isles; hear
the birds begin and the dawn weave their thin voices into
its white garment; hear the wheels begin and at last,
forgetting to discriminate between wheel and bird, and
letting at last the blue and purple fold itself about
them, sink into night, sink into blue, and resign, and
forget...
   But ah! As falling, the faller shrieks and grasps

the turf on the cliffs edge and saves himself, so, even
as they fell, they were waked wide; they were raised
upright; their eyes were opened; now it was day.
